[CIS-761] Add Working with Members guide (#1108)
GetStream/stream-chat-swift: stream-chat-swift-docs/docs/guides/working-with-members.md

---
title: Working with Members
---

## ChatChannelMember object
Chat channel members are represented by `ChatChannelMember` model.

> It's a subclass of `ChatUser` and apart properties typical for users, it also contains such info as member's role (owner, admin, moderator or member), invitation and ban details.

Reviewer: Let's move this down and rename the header "ChannelMember vs User", this section should (and does) explain the difference and why we need it

Author: A nice suggestion, added an explanation on "ChannelMember vs User", but didn't get the "move down" part, what do you propose exactly?

## Getting all members for a channel

`ChatChannelMemberListController` is an entity that provides access to members.
To get all the members for a channel with `general` id:
```swift
let memberListController = chatClient.memberListController( 
    query: .init(cid: .init(type: .messaging, id: "general"), filter: .none) 
)

memberListController.synchronize { error in 
    // handle error / access members 
    print(error ?? memberListController.members) 
}
```

## Filtering members

The endpoint working with members supports filtering on numerous criteria, for example:

### Filter by user.name exact match:
```swift
let memberListController = chatClient.memberListController( 
    query: .init(
        cid: .init(type: .messaging, id: "general"),

>         filter: .equal(.name, to: "Lando")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        filter: .equal(.name, to: "Lando") // will only match members with name "Lando"
```

    )
) 
```

### Filter by part of the user.name

```swift

> // Returns Lando, Conan etc.
> let memberListController = chatClient.memberListController( 
>     query: .init(
>         cid: .init(type: .messaging, id: "general"),
>         filter: .query(.name, text: "an")
>     ) 
> ) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
let memberListController = chatClient.memberListController( 
    query: .init(
        cid: .init(type: .messaging, id: "general"),
        filter: .query(.name, text: "an") // Returns Lando, Conan, any name with "an" in it
    ) 
) 
```

```

### Autocomplete users by user.name

```swift
// TODO explanation?
let memberListController = chatClient.memberListController( 
    query: .init(
        cid: .init(type: .messaging, id: "general"),
        filter: .autocomplete(.name, text: "La")
    ) 

> ) 

Reviewer: autocomplete works like `startsWith` ;)

```

> ### Query a member by id

Reviewer: We have `MemberController` for this case

    )
) 
```

### Query banned members

```swift
let memberListController = chatClient.memberListController( 
    query: .init(
        cid: .init(type: .messaging, id: "general"),
        filter: .equal(.isBanned, to: true)
    ) 
) 
```

### Query members with pending invites 

```swift
let memberListController = chatClient.memberListController( 
    query: .init(
        cid: .init(type: .messaging, id: "general"),
        filter: .equal("invite", to: "pending")
    ) 
) 
```

## Pagination and ordering

Since there potentially can be large amount of members in a channel, querying members supports pagination.
By default members are ordered from oldest to newest and can be paginated using offset-based pagination:

```swift
memberListController.loadNextMembers(limit: 10) { error in 
    // handle error / access members 
    print(error ?? memberListController.members) 
}
```

## Adding/removing members

```swift
let controller = chatClient.channelController(for: .init(type: .messaging, id: "general")) 
controller.addMembers(userIds: ["lando", "ann"]) 
controller.removeMembers(userIds: ["raya"])
```

:::caution
You can only add/remove up to 100 members at once.

> :::

Reviewer: kudos

### Leaving a channel

> It is possible for a user to leave the channel without moderator-level permissions if channel members have `RemoveOwnChannelMembership` permission:

Reviewer: Please link the permissions page here

Author: Are you referring to this permission's page? 
https://getstream.io/chat/docs/ios-swift/chat_permission_policies/?language=swift&q=permissions

Reviewer: Better to link https://getstream.io/chat/docs/ios-swift/channel_permission_policies/?language=swift&q=permissions

Or don't link at all and remove this sentence, since by default Channel Members already have this permission, this sentence creates confusion if the reader doesn't know about permissions. If they already configured special permissions, they probably know what they're doing anyway

Author: Makes sense!

```swift
let controller = chatClient.channelController(
    for: .init(type: .messaging, id: "general")
) 

> controller.removeMembers(userIds: ["my-user-id"])

Reviewer: We should probably introduce a `leave` helper.....

```

## Observing changes to members

Set the delegate of `ChatChannelMemberListController` to observe the changes in the system.

The delegate can be set directly only if you're **not** using custom extra data types. Due to the current limits of Swift and the way it handles protocols with associated types, it's required to use `setDelegate` method instead to set the delegate, if you're using custom extra data types.

### Without extra data
```swift
class Controller: ChatChannelMemberListControllerDelegate {
    let memberListController: ChatChannelMemberListController

    init() {
        memberListController = chatClient.memberListController( 
            query: .init(cid: .init(type: .messaging, id: "general"), filter: .none) 
        )
        memberListController.delegate = self
    }

    func memberListController(
        _ controller: ChatChannelMemberListController,
        didChangeMembers changes: [ListChange<ChatChannelMember>]
    ) {
        // process changes
    }
}
```

> ### With extra data

Reviewer: We don't need "With extraData" sections in these guides, ExtraData will have it's own guide encapsulating this topic

```swift
final class CustomExtraData: ExtraDataTypes { }

final class Controller: _ChatChannelMemberListControllerDelegate {
    typealias ExtraData = CustomExtraData
    let memberListController: ChatChannelMemberListController

    init() {
        memberListController = chatClient.memberListController( 
            query: .init(cid: .init(type: .messaging, id: "general"), filter: .none) 
        )
        memberListController.setDelegate(self)
    }
    
    func memberListController(
        _ controller: _ChatChannelMemberListController<ExtraData>,
        didChangeMembers changes: [ListChange<_ChatChannelMember<ExtraData.User>>]
    ) {
        // process changes
    }
}
```

// TODO ??

> More information on extra data topic can be found here: ---

Author: @b-onc  Are we going to add a separate page with explanations on extra data?

Reviewer: exactly, in the future

> ### Using Combine publishers

Reviewer: How about SwiftUI?

### Leaving a channel

> Leaving a channel is the same as removing members from a channel, but it's called with the current user id:

Reviewer: I like it!
